Curriculum vitae 

2008-2012 Doctoral studies, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and
          University of Edinburgh Dissertation: Divergence of an
          introduced population of the swimbladder-nematode
          Anguillicola crassus - a transcriptomic
          perspective. Supervisors: Prof. Dr. Horst Taraschewski and
          Prof. Mark Blaxter.  


2007-2008 Work on diploma thesis, University of Karlsruhe, Zoological
          Institute, Department for Parasitology and Ecology. Thesis
          title: Vergleichende licht- und elektronenmikroskopische
          Untersuchungen am Intestinaltrakt des invasiven
          Schwimmblasennematoden Anguillicola crassus aus
          verschiedenen Aalarten.

2001-2007 Undergraduate studies in Biology, University of Karlsruhe.
          Main subject: Zoology. Subsidiary subjects: Genetics, Botany

Research Interests 

I am interested in the evolution of host-parasite interactions,
speciation, population- and phylogenetics. I am convinced that
transcriptomics and genomics will continue to revolutionise these
areas of research. Working with such data developed a strong interest
in computational tools and statistical analyses and especially in the
reuse and reproducibility of analyses in a scripting environment. I
use Perl and R/bioconductor as my main research tools and enjoy the
graphic capabilities of the latter using it for the illustration of
large scale data-sets.

Projects

Anguillicola crassus

30 years ago Anguillicola crassus was introduced from Asia, where it
parasitises Angilla japonica, to Europe and spread here in the new
host species Anguilla anguilla. During my doctoral research I
investigated whether and how much phenotypic plasticity or rapid
adaptation to differential selection are contributing to its success
in invading new host-populations. Differential gene-expression in
A. crassus populations was assessed using next generation sequencing
on the 454 and Illumina platforms and genetic components of
differences were isolated in cross-inoculation experiments with both
Asian and European host-species and parasite populations. The
identified candidate expression-phenotypes will be more accessible to
population-genetic analysis, then classical morphological
differences. Currently I aim to implement projects building on this
idea.

Apicomplexan parasites and their hosts

Eimeria falciformis

I am supporting a genome project for this coccidian parasite of mice.
Genome-Sequencing and digital transcriptomics of life-cycle stages will
help to establish this parasite as a model for apicomplexan parasites
in general. The strength of this model, compared to all apicomplexan
model-systems available to date, will be the accessibility of sexual
stages of the parasite in a model-organism host.

Sarcocystis

I am currently developing a project on speciation of Sarcosporidian
parasites and their lizard-hosts. More on these projects once they
materialise...

Peer Reviewed Publications

Emanuel G Heitlinger, Stephen Bridgett, Anna Montazam, Horst
Taraschewski and Mark L Blaxter (under review) The transcritpome of
the invasive swimmbladder nematode Anguillicola crassus. BMC Genomics

Dominik R Laetsch, Emanuel G Heitlinger, Horst Taraschewski, Steven A
Nadler and Mark L Blaxter (2012) The phylogenetics of Anguillicolidae
(Nematoda: Anguillicolidea), swimbladder parasites of eels. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2012, 12:60

Emanuel G Heitlinger, Dominik R Laetsch, Urszula Weclawski, Yu-San Han
and Horst Taraschewski (2009) Massive encapsulation of larval
Anguillicoloides crassus in the intestinal wall of Japanese
eels. Parasites & Vectors, 2:48.
